README.md, before:

# Introduction to Traefik

a blog post series to my homelab

![blog post logo](storage/d23d82a2.png)

## Part One

In this blog post, I will start by walking you through the process of setting up [Traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/) as a reverse proxy for your homelab. My setup involves using a virtual machine connected via a point-to-point VPN to a cloud VPS, along with several Docker containers on my homelab for various tasks and learning purposes. The goal is to expose only Traefik to the internet, which will then provide access to my internal homelab. For certain applications, I also use Tailscale, which I prefer not to expose directly to the internet. In short, I have a complex internal homelab setup, and in this post, we’ll simplify it!

I've made a short video to accompany this blog post:

[![Watch the video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/t0mFq_94QtA/maxresdefault.jpg)](https://youtu.be/t0mFq_94QtA)

## docker compose

To begin, we need to set up a basic [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) YAML file.

As of the time of writing this blog post, the latest Traefik Docker container image is version 3.3. It is best to declare a specific version instead of using "latest" tag.

```yaml
image: traefik:v3.3
```

Using an **.env** file in a Docker Compose configuration is important for several reasons, as for configure variables, secrets and it is easy to reuse though several services and to avoid hardcoding values. For traefik is important so we can configure the docker GID in order traefil to be able to use the docker socket.

eg. **.env**

```bash
# This is my user id
PUID=1001
# This is my docker group id
PGID=142
UMASK="002"
TZ="Europe/Athens"
DNS="88.198.92.222"
```

Next interesting topic is the volumes section.

I would like to mount a local directory for the traefik configuration, which I will later use with the dynamic file provider. Additionally, to enable Traefik to recongize our (future) docker images, we need to mount the docker socket too.

```bash
    volumes:
      - ./traefik:/etc/traefik
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

to conclude, here is a very basic docker compose yaml file:

**docker-compose.yml**

```yaml
---
services:
  traefik:
    image: traefik:v3.3
    container_name: traefik
    hostname: traefik
    env_file:
      - path: ./.env
        required: true
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      # The Web UI (enabled by --api.insecure=true)
      - 8080:8080
      # The HTTP port
      - 80:80
    volumes:
      - ./traefik:/etc/traefik
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

## pull traefik docker image

we can explicitly get the Traefik docker container image

```bash
docker compose pull traefik
```

## traefik configuration file

we also need to create the configuration file by enabling the API and the dashboard for now.

Create the directory and file

`traefik/traefik.yml`

and write this:

```yaml
# API and dashboard configuration
api:
  insecure: true

```

## Start traefik docker

We are ready start and run our Traefik docker container:

```bash
docker compose up
```

result is something like:

```
[+] Running 2/2
✔ Network homelab_default  Created       0.3s
✔ Container traefik        Created       0.4s
Attaching to traefik
```

To stop traefik from docker compose, we need to open a new terminal and type from the same directory

```bash
docker compose down
```

or, we ca run the docker compose and detach it so it runs on the background:

```bash
docker compose up traefik -d
```

This is going to be useful for the future as we starting each service one by one.

## Test traefik

Open your browser and click on: http://127.0.0.1:8080

you will see something like:

![traefik dashboard](storage/e177a687.png)

Commit message:

Add link to Part Two

README.md, after:

# Introduction to Traefik

a blog post series to my homelab

![blog post logo](storage/d23d82a2.png)

check here for [Introduction to Traefik - Part Two](https://github.com/ebal/traefik-intro-02)

## Part One

In this blog post, I will start by walking you through the process of setting up [Traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/) as a reverse proxy for your homelab. My setup involves using a virtual machine connected via a point-to-point VPN to a cloud VPS, along with several Docker containers on my homelab for various tasks and learning purposes. The goal is to expose only Traefik to the internet, which will then provide access to my internal homelab. For certain applications, I also use Tailscale, which I prefer not to expose directly to the internet. In short, I have a complex internal homelab setup, and in this post, we’ll simplify it!

I've made a short video to accompany this blog post:

[![Watch the video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/t0mFq_94QtA/maxresdefault.jpg)](https://youtu.be/t0mFq_94QtA)

## docker compose

To begin, we need to set up a basic [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) YAML file.

As of the time of writing this blog post, the latest Traefik Docker container image is version 3.3. It is best to declare a specific version instead of using "latest" tag.

```yaml
image: traefik:v3.3
```

Using an **.env** file in a Docker Compose configuration is important for several reasons, as for configure variables, secrets and it is easy to reuse though several services and to avoid hardcoding values. For traefik is important so we can configure the docker GID in order traefil to be able to use the docker socket.

eg. **.env**

```bash
# This is my user id
PUID=1001
# This is my docker group id
PGID=142
UMASK="002"
TZ="Europe/Athens"
DNS="88.198.92.222"
```

Next interesting topic is the volumes section.

I would like to mount a local directory for the traefik configuration, which I will later use with the dynamic file provider. Additionally, to enable Traefik to recongize our (future) docker images, we need to mount the docker socket too.

```bash
    volumes:
      - ./traefik:/etc/traefik
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

to conclude, here is a very basic docker compose yaml file:

**docker-compose.yml**

```yaml
---
services:
  traefik:
    image: traefik:v3.3
    container_name: traefik
    hostname: traefik
    env_file:
      - path: ./.env
        required: true
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      # The Web UI (enabled by --api.insecure=true)
      - 8080:8080
      # The HTTP port
      - 80:80
    volumes:
      - ./traefik:/etc/traefik
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

## pull traefik docker image

we can explicitly get the Traefik docker container image

```bash
docker compose pull traefik
```

## traefik configuration file

we also need to create the configuration file by enabling the API and the dashboard for now.

Create the directory and file

`traefik/traefik.yml`

and write this:

```yaml
# API and dashboard configuration
api:
  insecure: true

```

## Start traefik docker

We are ready start and run our Traefik docker container:

```bash
docker compose up
```

result is something like:

```
[+] Running 2/2
✔ Network homelab_default  Created       0.3s
✔ Container traefik        Created       0.4s
Attaching to traefik
```

To stop traefik from docker compose, we need to open a new terminal and type from the same directory

```bash
docker compose down
```

or, we ca run the docker compose and detach it so it runs on the background:

```bash
docker compose up traefik -d
```

This is going to be useful for the future as we starting each service one by one.

## Test traefik

Open your browser and click on: http://127.0.0.1:8080

you will see something like:

![traefik dashboard](storage/e177a687.png)
